is veganism more of a comedy than a
tragedy
there are ways in which veganism is in
2018 tragicomic we have these enormous
ambitions to save the planet to make
this tremendous ecological difference to
bring about this unbelievable cultural
change really a change in epochs in
human history move beyond having a
society that's based on the crude
exploitation of animal labor of animal
skin of animal flesh to do away with
something that's been part and parcel of
Western civilization Eastern
civilization every civilization
basically since the Stone Age since the
start of recorded history whenever you
want to start the clock to make this
fundamental change it's this enormous
ambition in its intro incredibly
inspirational incredibly aspirational
and you have the contrast between the
audacity of that ambition and the PUE
ninis of the methods we actually employ
you have James ASPI flying around the
world and telling people
deadpan serious you are the people who
are saving the planet you are the people
who are saving the lives of millions of
animals how Instagram
[Music]
deadpan serious Instagram
in fact he's taking time off and
spending less time on YouTube and less
time on lectures and less time talking
to strangers on the streets because he
believes so strongly in the difference
that he can make through Instagram and
what does he produce on Instagram he
produces a kind of wallpaper that is in
the background of people's lives I mean
admittedly its type of wallpaper they
kind of carry around with them in their
purse or their wallet on a laptop
computer on a cellular phone on a tablet
what-have-you but he gets these numbers
for how many people have seen his posts
and his
host is like him is sitting there
smiling next to a bowl of hummus and you
know yeah maybe there were a few
sentences there about saving the planet
or go vegan or whatever but I mean
people yes thousands of people maybe
sometimes millions of people for half a
second scroll past this or it appears in
the background of their lives like I say
like wallpaper just as easily ignored as
an advertisement you walk past in a
subway station or any of the decorative
flora and fauna that surround us in the
21st century digital jungle it passes in
a split second in between other images
of beautiful people eating other kinds
of expensive food or swimming on other
beaches or what have you and he really
thinks he's making progress towards that
goal he may thinks he's making progress
towards that horizon
veganism in the year 2018 is laughable
its comedic because it's the image of a
man a man covered with muscle like James
ass be bent over with a terrible load on
his back struggling like Atlas to hold
up the world but when you actually look
more closely he's not holding up a
planet he's not holding up a boulder
he's holding up a pebble he's holding up
a stone the size of a pea and behaving
as if he's carrying the weight of the
world on his shoulders
so yeah in 2018 what's going on with
activists of this kind did usual
activism the YouTube demi-monde the
Instagram demi-monde the donor driven
permanent vacation yeah it's more comedy
than tragedy but as I warned in my
earlier video for the people who are
actually engaged in this form of
activism I think it always ends badly
whether that's five years from now seven
years from now ten years would be a
really good run but think about where
this
puts you in your career a few years from
now when that short-term fame runs out
when the money dries up so on and so
forth but nevertheless veganism in
principle is a tremendously inspiring
movement and I even see this in the
jealousy of other meat-eaters who want
to get involved I mean I may sound
ridiculous but I really have seen and
interact with some of those people I've
interacted on the internet with people
who wish they were part of a movement
that motivated them and rewarded their
intellectual acumen and you know they
want the things that veganism even in
2018 provides for passionate adherents
and participants Davina's they want they
want to be part of that kind of
motivated community if you like maybe a
community in quotation marks maybe you
live somewhere where you really do feel
like you're part of a community or a
political movement um I have met and
spoken to people who really want what
what we've got and on the other hand of
course I can look across the aisle to
much more successful political
organizations and social movements or
even religious movements and I can say
gee as a vegan I wish we had what you
guys have got I wish we had that higher
level of organization motivation
effectiveness what have you but it's
needless to say the criticism of James
ASPI or the criticism of earthling ed
does not apply to PCRM Physicians
Committee for Responsible medicine there
are there are examples of real vegans
making a real difference all over the
world both in organizations and as
individual activists they just don't do
it by taking off their shirt and showing
off $50,000 worth of tattoos and
swimming in the ocean and what-have-you
it's just not the form of lifestyle
activism James SB represents and it's
also in my opinion not the kind of the
kind of Street activism that James ASPI
Earthling ad and Jolie carb strong all
represent and i'ma I honestly think I'm
a moderate critic of all of those
methods you can hear discussed in this
video can hear discussed in the podcast
I just recorded last week I'm not of the
position
that those methods are of absolutely
zero value but I'm pointing out look
guys when we sit down and do the math
when we look at what kind of difference
we're trying to make what kind of impact
were actually having we I think we need
to rethink our assumptions in terms of
input output and and real outcomes so
I'm just gonna read now off my of my
cellular phone here I'm gonna read an
email that I sent to one of my fellow
vegan youtubers I wrote as follows this
may not be meaningful to you but I'm
saying it to you anyway
so it opens with a tone of a bit of a
warning I really think the principle
difference between myself and James ASPI
is that I'm not deluded about how little
I have to offer I know that I don't have
much to give I know that my mere words
don't make any kind of an impact beyond
a normal conversation in a coffee shop I
will return to reading this this email I
sent to one of my colleagues here hello
guys I don't think I'm over selling it
or under selling it when I say that it's
possible to meet someone and have a
conversation in a coffee shop that
impacts you profoundly and changes you
for the rest of your life I think I've
had that kind of conversation with
people in coffee shops at the office my
job you know when I was a university
professor or when I worked in a
humanitarian work sure I think a number
of times I've had conversations that
really made people question things in
their lives they've never questioned
before and so on sure that happens in
your life and if you have these
conversations if you're putting in many
many hours with strangers on the street
or you putting in many many hours here
on YouTube for sure you can have those
kinds of conversations also however it's
it's really important to keep it in
perspective and I've seen these
different fads rise and fall on YouTube
of course it's really you know digital
vegan activism within YouTube that I'm
interested in that I'm following but
nevertheless I've seen them come and go
across the board um I recently saw one
of my own videos from the past from a
couple of years ago just YouTube itself
recommended I see this video you know
popped up and I clicked on it cuz I
couldn't remember what I'd said in a
particular video and when I clicked on
that video it was an example of a video
that hasn't aged well at all many of my
videos say this in the intro I often say
look I'm gonna talk about this issue in
a way that's still gonna be meaningful
still gonna make sense five years from
now but I clicked on this particular
video and it was really motivated by and
agitated by the obsession at that time
with lifestyle activism it was really a
reaction against the fact that the main
criticism I received from my audience at
that time was that I was not
good-looking enough to be a vegan
activist I'm not joking and those
criticisms were not a joke at that time
just a couple of years ago the dominant
notion of vegan activism was so-called
lifestyle activism revolving around
weight loss athleticism like weight
lifting swimming at the beach showing
off your body showing how much you were
enjoying a vegan diet that paradigm was
so dominant that I was having to respond
to criticism that I'm not good-looking
enough to do this vegan activist thing
now some of you watching this video have
been in the game long enough that you
also have faced that kind of criticism
but already here we are a couple years
later and you can look back and laugh at
how ridiculous that wasn't and I was
really having to respond by saying look
you know what the future of this
movement involves old ugly and fat
people and some of them are going to
make the most important differences in
the movement and you know somebody like
Gary France ioneiy his contribution to
this movement for better and for worse
I'm a critic but he's made some positive
contributions and some negative
contributions his contribution has
nothing to do with how good he looks in
a bathing suit it has nothing to do with
this with his body just recently I was
seeing that that vegan diet advice dr.
McDougall dr. John McDougall and was the
he his wife were not
active enough no I don't know if that
was referring to them being not muscular
enough or not thin enough we're just
just not a tribe just the face like they
didn't they weren't aging well or
something but they look too elderly they
are elderly they look elderly because
they are totally that's you know guess
what guys you know I know you want to
leave a good-looking corpse like you
know sooner or later he's gonna die of
old age you know tell you the gifts
heart of aren't immune from this growing
old and dying stuff but you know some of
that some of that is still going on but
my point is here there's a contrast at
that time the romanticized view of vegan
activism was entirely hung up on
lifestyle diet weight loss bikini
personal beauty sir and today today the
number one complaint I get the number
ones have a hostile comment or question
I get is that I'm not spending enough
time in the streets to call myself a
vegan activist and I've already
responded to this to me the street is
not a special wonderful place I can have
the same conversation in a coffee shop
in a theater in a museum I can have the
same conversation anywhere that I can
have on the street and in many ways the
street is an especially disadvantageous
place on the street you have the
disadvantage that like maximum 15
minutes of conversation certain level of
hostility and discomfort it's it's
actually in my opinion the street if
anything that's a lot of disadvantages
but that's that's become in in many
vegans Minds that's the current fad the
current fashion and guess what guys this
too will pass you guys are gonna get
bored of wearing a mask and standing in
silence for four hours at a time on the
street I'm not saying it's completely
meaningless I'm not saying it as zero
efficacy but guess what well you guys
are wasting four hours on the street
wearing the mask what are they doing
down at PCRM okay other people are
really building the future of the vegan
movement including straight up
ecological vegans I discovered a new guy
I can't really show him out because I've
read his book yet I haven't even had
time to watch it select a guy based in a
guy based in Michigan Kalamazoo Michigan
never heard of him before Pope Yeah
right sir Jim the confrontation
anyway Kalamazoo Michigan shout-out to
Kalamazoo um you know and this guy has a
PhD he has decades of experience in
ecology he wrote a book dealing with
ecological effects of human diet etc etc
and his form of activism includes he
apparently owns and operates an animal
shelter he also apparently owns and
operates a cookie factory making vegan
cookies I can't really show the motor
the stage because I haven't looked that
depleted way Dumbo's look Wow I discover
this guy because one of my patreon
subscribers in ago well so obviously I
mean so this is way more like the PCRM
style this is professional activism
that's again I've already draw attention
this the excuse made for donating money
to earthling ed and james SP is that
they're professional activists and my
comment before was when you really think
about it there's absolutely nothing
professional about what these guys are
doing okay but this guy by contrast then
you discover this guy with a PhD in
ecology distinguished career as an
author activist researcher consultant
apparently a cookie factory owner he's
somehow the CI CEO of a vegan cookie
factory you know he's doing food food
production you know for the vegan
movement this is professional what PCRM
is doing is professional so if you want
to talk about professional activism with
financial transparency and
accountability
you know operations that really would
merit
you know donations and so on that's out
there but the ultimate irony is the same
guy this guy out in Kalamazoo his
YouTube channel has fewer views than
mine does he puts up you know a lecture
about you know one of these ecological
topics the impact on the rain cycle or
water use or air pollution these these
various things and he's getting less
views sorry
fewer views let's keep it chromatically
right here on a Bella ciela he is
getting fewer views than I would get if
I put up a YouTube video complaining
about my sex life coming soon but look
so I continued I wrote I wrote to this
you know colleague and in the movement
here um I'm not deluded about how little
I've got to offer
I just know that I don't have that much
to give okay James ass P flies to Ottawa
flies to Israel and preaches
self-congratulation to small crowds of
vegans quote we are the future we are
saving the planet at close quote and he
really believes that he's doing
something great he really believes that
the airplane ticket was a great use of
donors money and I would look at that as
a complete waste of time and a complete
waste of money this is neither false
humility nor false cynicism on my part
okay just pause now again I said earlier
I'm not under selling this or over
selling it I think these conversations
on the street at the rallies I think
they're equally as effective as a
conversation you might have in a coffee
shop but for real right now this look I
raised six thousand five hundred dollars
I did a fundraiser on this channel we
in less than 48 hours and straight
donations no tax benefits no kickbacks
should we right now raise two thousand
dollars so that I can fly to Zurich and
just talk to some people in a coffee
shop to me that would be a complete
waste of anyone's time and money and
sure very often there are issues of a
language barrier there are issues of a
culture barrier there's the fundamental
issue of the fact that when James ASPI
gets there he really has nothing to say
he really has nothing to offer as I've
said again and again he's not in the
position of a surgeon who gets an
airplane ticket and flies to Myanmar or
flies to Haiti and helps the pool
or maybe helps people when there's been
an earthquake or a tornado or some other
natural disaster hurricane you know
there are circumstances in which donors
give money to send someone to a third
world country even if they're already
wealthy maybe the surgeon is already
wealthy but you still are going to
donate this money to put him on an
airplane and reward him for going to
this third-world kind of this disaster
area and helping people he has a set of
skills that the the donor that the
donors can recognize and verify the
recipients can benefit from there's
something of value there being exchanged
or being given away for free right and
in the case of some doula James asked me
my claim is very directly there is
nothing of the sort
when he gets to Zurich when he gets to
Israel when he gets to Ottawa what is it
that he can say or do better than a
dozen other vegans who are already there
in Zurich or Ottawa and of course he has
no commitment to the place he has no
knowledge of or concern with her
engagement with you know local political
conditions or community building or so
on this is part of being a carpetbagger
in the in the province of our time so
there are a lot of constraints built
into this now look guys I'm not totally
opposed to flying to Zurich
if we're actually gonna do a fundraiser
for me to fly to Zurich right let's
stick with this for a minute but there
has to be a point if if there's an event
if we organize something we're actually
gonna do something I can contribute to
in a meaningful way
absolutely okay this justifies you guys
donating the money and the airplane
company burning the jet fuel and causing
the carbon okay we're going to Zurich
because it's actually gonna call for
something it's actually gonna make a
difference but you know I'm just
questioning if the effectiveness is what
we're doing here is comparable to just
hanging out in a coffee shop let's be
honest with our with ourselves about
where this money is going and and what's
what the outcomes are for these these
efforts being made okay I continue to
quote yeah Game of Thrones quote you may
or may not know the phrase words are
wind that's in the books for Game of
Thrones all the time words are wind I
mean you know
people come on this YouTube channel and
criticize me for that they say hey
you're all talk and no action you you
want special effects you you want my
YouTube channel to have like fight
scenes you know action sequences like
you know what what is it you're looking
for here you're right you know this
YouTube channel is this is talk but if
you're paying for activism the word
activism contains act it's supposed to
be about action and what I'm doing here
on YouTube fundamentally is I'm trying
to find other colleagues I'm trying to
get organized I'm trying to create a
basis a platform for real-world activism
had mixed results but hey I'm looking
for colleagues I'm looking for people I
can collaborate with and I'm also
looking in a sense to purify the
language within the movement when I came
into this game there were so many
bizarre and muddied misconceptions
ruling within veganism there were really
a lot of you know deep and invidious
divisions than veganism that people
didn't even have the the vocabulary to
express or understand and over the last
four years of engaging in debate and
discussion and philosophizing with
people I really have seen things come
into a much sharper focus there's a lot
of mutual understanding about what are
the meaningful and what are the
meaningless divisions within veganism
when I first came on to YouTube people
were absolutely shocked that I would
regard castrating dogs as negative as a
form of violence that I regarded the
domestication of animals in the negative
and critical way I did there were a lot
of really popular voices and veganism
that made cuddling up to pets the core
of the vegan identity and I was
challenging that and saying no no no
let's really think about this in a in a
serious and thoroughgoing way on a long
list of issues like that I've really
seen in that sense progress but what
kind of progress do I mean
I mean progress from a vague and
confused state of mutual
misunderstanding within the movement to
a state of much more crisp sophisticated
mutual
in recognition that is a type of
progress that is a type of
disambiguation that goes on within the
movement I don't see James asked me
doing that I don't see earthling head
doing that I see those guys as [ __ ]
artists you know I say words are wind
well you know some are more like a light
breeze Eric continue I'm not a surgeon
and this ain't surgery I'm not flying in
to save anyone nor even to attempt to
help anyone if I attend a conference or
if I attend a rally like that I know
just how little I have to offer and yet
I know it's more than James Aspie can